<h1> Large Scale Distributed Systems -- 1st Class (Theory) </h1>

> 13th September 2023 -- FEUP

<h1> Table of Contents </h1>

- [Distributed Systems and Network Concepets Review](#distributed-systems-and-network-concepets-review)
  - [What's a distributed system?](#whats-a-distributed-system)
    - [What is a message?](#what-is-a-message)
  - [Internet Protocols](#internet-protocols)
- [Asynchronous Communication (MOM)](#asynchronous-communication-mom)
  - [Message-Oriented Middleware (MOM)](#message-oriented-middleware-mom)
    - [Basic Patterns](#basic-patterns)
  - [What's the difference with regards to UDP?](#whats-the-difference-with-regards-to-udp)
  - [Messaging Service Implementation](#messaging-service-implementation)
  - [Ayntchronous Communication Applications](#ayntchronous-communication-applications)
- [Java Messaging Service (JMS)](#java-messaging-service-jms)
  - [JMS Architecture and Model](#jms-architecture-and-model)
  - [JMS Messages](#jms-messages)
  - [JMS Queues](#jms-queues)

## Distributed Systems and Network Concepets Review

### What's a distributed system?

> A distributed system is a collection of independent process which are spacially separated and communicate with each other by message passing.

#### What is a message?

> A message is a sequence of bytes, structured in a way that is meaningful to the application that sends it and to the application that receives it. Its format is specified by the application.

### Internet Protocols

> On the Internet, the properties of the communication channe provided to an application depend on the trasnport protocol used (UDP or TCP)
>> The design of a distributed system is influenced by the properties of the communication channels provided by the chosen transport protocol.

- Application Layer --> Specific communication services
- Transport Layer --> Communication between 2 or more processes
- Network Layer --> Communication between 2 computers not directly connected
- Interface Layer --> Communication between 2 computers directly connected

| Property | UDP | TCP |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Abstraction | Message | Stream |
| Connection-Based | No | Yes |
| Reliable (loss & duplication) | No | Yes |
| Ordered | No | Yes |
| Flow Control | No | Yes |
| Number of Recepients | 1/n  | 1 |

## Asynchronous Communication (MOM)

**Asynchronous** message-based communication
> Sender and receiver need not to synchronize with one another to exchange messages
> Communication service (middleware) stores the message as long as needed to deliver them.

This services is close to that of the postal service, where the sender and receiver do not need to be present at the same time to exchange messages.

The serivce guarantees may vary:

- order;
- reliability;

### Message-Oriented Middleware (MOM)

#### Basic Patterns

- **Point-to-point** --> The model is that of a *queue*
  - Several senders can put messages in the queue
  - Several receivers can get messages from the queue
  - But each message is delivered to at most one process (receiver)

- **Publish-subscriber** --> This is more like a discussion forum. Instead of queues, we talk about *topics*.
  - Several *publishers* can put messages in a topic
  - Several *subscribers* can get messages from a topic
  - Unlike in queues, a message may be delivered to several processes (subscribers)

### What's the difference with regards to UDP?

UDP communication also supports:

- Unicast communication
  - Any process may send to a single destination (( IP address, port ) pair)
  - If we use SO_REUSEADDR, several processes (in the same host)can receive messages sent to a given destination
- Multicast communication
  - Any process may send to an IP multicast group
  - A meesage sent to an IP multicast group is delivered to all processes that have joined the group

Key properties:

- Asyncrhony: senders/publisherds need not to synchronize with receivers/subscribers
- Anoniymity: senders/publishers do not need to know the identity of receivers/subscribers and vice-versa
  - Queues and topics usualyy do not use transport-level addresses, but rather high-level naming

### Messaging Service Implementation

- Asynchronous communication is provided by a messaging service
  - Other deployments, e.g. with a single communcation server, are possible
  - At the lowest communication level, there mush be synchronization between sender and receiver.

### Ayntchronous Communication Applications

- THis type of communication is appropriate for applications when the sender and receiver are loosely coupled. Some examples are:
  - Enterpreise application integration
  - Workflow applications
  - MIcro-services
  - Message-based communication between people
    - Email, SMS
    - Instant (real-time) messaging

## Java Messaging Service (JMS)

JMS is an API for MoM.

- It allows Java applications to acess MOM in a portable way
- It provides a maxiumum commom divisor of functionality provided by well known MOM providers (IBM MQSeries, TIBCO)

JMS is repsentative of the MOM functionalities that may be useful for develioping entreprise applications

- JMS can be integrated with the Java Transaction API (JTA) to provide transactional messaging

### JMS Architecture and Model

JMS supports two types of messaging models:

- Queues (for single-desitnation communication)
- Topics (for multi-destination communication)

JMS defines 2 fundamental components:

- JMS Provider i.e, the MOM service implementation
  - It includes client-side libraries
- JMS Client i.e, the application that sends/receives meessages to a destination via the JMS provider

JMS specifies the API, and its semantics, that a provider offers to its clients.

To use the JMS,a client mustfirst set tup a connection to the JMS provider. 

- This is not a TCP connection but it may be built on top of TCP

Clients send/receive messages to/from destinations via a session.

### JMS Messages

JMS messages have 3 parts:

- Header: Is a set of fields necessary for identifying and routing messages
  - THis set is defined in the JMS specification
    - JMSDeliveryMode, JMSExpiration, JMSMessageId, JMSRedelivered, JMSPriority are some of the 11 fields

- Properties: these are optional fields that logically belong to the header - i.e, they are meta-data
  - A property is a key-value pair
    - key is a string, which must obey some rules
    - value can be one of serveral primitive types, as well as String or Object classes.
  - Properties are defined by the applications
    - Essentially, they are an extension mechanism for the header

### JMS Queues

Match the queue model described above:

- Several senders/producers can put message in a queue
- Several receivers/consumers can get messages from a queue
- But each message is delivered to at most one consumer
- This helps improve scalability

Queues are long-lived:

- are created by an admin, not the clients
- 
